%==============================================================================
% queues-implementation.tex
%==============================================================================

\chapter{Investigated Queues}
\label{chap:queues-implementation}

% We present three algorithms, each with a different choice for how the
% items are extracted. In all of our algorithms, the owner inserts new
% tasks at the tail of the queue. In the first algorithm (idempotent
% LIFO) tasks are always extracted from the tail, while in the second
% algorithm (idempotent FIFO) tasks are always extracted from the
% head. In the third algorithm (idempotent double-ended), the owner
% extracts from the tail while thieves extract from the head of the
% queue. We use the term queue loosely to mean a structure with items
% stored in the order in which they were inserted.

\section{Work-Stealing Deque}
\label{sec:queues-implementation-ws-deque}

The \emph{Work-Stealing Deque} is an unbounded double-ended queue that
dynamically resizes itself as needed. Its design is based on the
\emph{Dynamic Circular Work-Stealing Deque} \cite{Chase2005, Lev2005}.

The \lstinline!WorkStealingDeque! class has three fields,
\lstinline!workItems!, \lstinline!bottom!, and \lstinline!top!:

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Work-stealing deque}, 
  label=lst:work-stealing-deque]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/WorkStealingDeque.java
}

The array \lstinline!workItems! is used in a cyclic way with
\lstinline!top! and \lstinline!bottom! indicating the two ends of the
deque. An important property of \lstinline!top! is that it is never
decreased. If \lstinline!bottom! is less than or equal to
\lstinline!top!, the deque is empty.

The \lstinline!put()! method (Listing
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-put}) first checks whether the current
circular array is full (Line
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-put-size}). If it is full, we call
\lstinline!expand()! (Line \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-put-expand})
to enlarge it by copying the deque's elements into a bigger array. Now
we can put the new work item in the location specified by
\lstinline!bottom!, and then increment \lstinline!bottom! by 1 (Line
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-put-update-bottom}).

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Work-stealing deque: \lstinline!put()! method}, 
  label=lst:work-stealing-deque-put]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/WorkStealingDeque-put.java
}

Listing \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-expand} shows the
\lstinline!expand()! method. It allocates a new doubled size array and
copies the old array's elements into the new array. The use of modular
arithmetic ensures that even though the array has changed size and the
work items may have shifted positions, there is no need to update the
\lstinline!top! or \lstinline!bottom! fields.

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Work-stealing deque: \lstinline!expand()! method}, 
  label=lst:work-stealing-deque-expand]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/WorkStealingDeque-expand.java
}

In Listing \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take} we define the
\lstinline!take()! method. If the deque is empty, we reset it to an
empty state where \lstinline!bottom == top! and return
\lstinline!null! (Lines \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-empty-1} --
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-empty-2}). If taking a work item
does not make the deque empty, the owner can take it without using a
Compare-and-Swap operation (Lines
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-non-empty-1} --
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-non-empty-2}). If the owner is
trying to take the last work item, then it must perform a
Compare-and-Swap on \lstinline!top! to see if it won or lost any race
with a concurrent \lstinline!steal()! operation to take the last item
(Line \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-cas}). Regardless whether the
Compare-and-Swap operation succeeds, the value of \lstinline!top! is
incremented by 1 and the deque is empty: If the Compare-and-Swap in
\lstinline!take()! fails, then some concurrent \lstinline!steal()!
operation succeeded in stealing the last work item and incremented
\lstinline!top!. Therefore the operation completes by storing the
incremented top value in \lstinline!bottom! which resets the deque to
an empty state (Line \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-take-update}).

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Work-stealing deque: \lstinline!take()! method},
  label=lst:work-stealing-deque-take]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/WorkStealingDeque-take.java
}

The \lstinline!steal()! method (Listing
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-steal}) first reads \lstinline!top!, then
\lstinline!bottom!. The order is important: If a thread reads
\lstinline!bottom! after \lstinline!top! and sees it is no greater,
the queue is indeed empty because a concurrent modification of
\lstinline!top! could only have increased the \lstinline!top! value.

If the deque is empty, \lstinline!steal()! returns \lstinline!null!
(Lines \ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-steal-empty-1} --
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-steal-empty-2}). Else it reads the
element stored in the \lstinline!top! position of the cyclic array,
and tries to increment \lstinline!top! using a Compare-and-Swap
operation. If the Compare-and-Swap fails, it implies that a concurrent
\lstinline!steal()! successfully removed an element from the deque, so
the operation tries to steal again. Otherwise it returns the element
read right before the successful Compare-and-Swap operation.

To prevent \lstinline!steal()! from returning the deque's last work
item if it was already taken by a concurrent \lstinline!take()! after
\lstinline!bottom! is read (Line
\label{sec:queues-implementation-idempotent-ws-deque-interval}

\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-steal-bottom}), but before the
Compare-and-Swap operation is executed (Line
\ref{lst:work-stealing-deque-steal-cas}), any \lstinline!take()! that
empties the deque tries to modify \lstinline!top! using a
Compare-and-Swap operation.

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Work-stealing deque: \lstinline!steal()! method}, 
  label=lst:work-stealing-deque-steal]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/WorkStealingDeque-steal.java
}

\section{Idempotent Work-Stealing Deque}
\label{sec:queues-implementation-idempotent-ws-deque}

The \emph{Idempotent Work-Stealing Deque} is based on ideas from
\cite{Leijen2009} and \cite{Michael2009}. It is an unbounded
double-ended queue that can resize itself if needed.

Unlike the \emph{Lazy Deque} (Section
\ref{sec:queues-background-current-implementation}) or the
\emph{Work-Stealing Deque} (Section
\ref{sec:queues-implementation-ws-deque}), the \emph{Idempotent
  Work-Stealing Deque} does not guarantee that each inserted work item
is extracted \emph{exactly} once. Instead it uses the relaxed
semantics of guaranteeing that each inserted work item is extracted
\emph{at least} once.

While this nondeterminism might be dangerous in many applications, it
is fine for our usage of the deque as we modified the interval's
\lstinline!exec()! method to be idempotent (see Section
\ref{sec:queues-implementation-idempotent-ws-deque-interval}).\footnote{If
  the application can tolerate duplicated work, for example parallel
  garbage collectors or constraint solvers, we do not have to make the
  \verb!exec()! method idempotent.}

\subsection{Idempotent Interval}
\label{sec:queues-implementation-idempotent-ws-deque-interval}

Listing \ref{lst:interval} shows the idempotent interval
implementation. Each interval has an associated state
\lstinline!RunningState! (Line \ref{lst:interval-state}). Upon
initialization, the state is set to \lstinline!INIT! (Line
\ref{lst:interval-init}). The internal \lstinline!exec()!  method
performs an atomic Compare-and-Swap operation to try to switch from
\lstinline!INIT! to \lstinline!RUNNING! (Line
\ref{lst:interval-cas}). If the Compare-and-Swap operation succeeds,
the associated task is executed and the state is set to
\lstinline!DONE! afterwards (Line \ref{lst:interval-done}).

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Interval}, 
  label=lst:interval]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/Interval.java
}

This ensures that each interval is only executed once, or stated
differently: running an interval is an idempotent operation.

Idempotent intervals would also simplify the mailbox style
implementation for locality-aware scheduling \cite{Acar2002}.

\subsection{Implementation}
\label{sec:queues-implementation-idempotent-ws-deque-implementation}

In contrast to the \emph{Lazy Deque} (Section
\ref{sec:queues-background-current-implementation}) or the
\emph{Work-Stealing Deque} (Section
\ref{sec:queues-implementation-ws-deque}), the owner's methods
\lstinline!put()! and \lstinline!take()! of the \emph{Idempotent
  Work-Stealing Deque} do not have to use expensive Compare-and-Swap
operations. We can optimize the owner's methods by avoiding the high
overheads of these operations.

The \lstinline!IdempotentWorkStealingDeque! class has an inner class,
\lstinline!ArrayData!, and two fields, \lstinline!anchor! and
\lstinline!workItems!:

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Idempotent work-stealing deque}, 
  label=lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/IdempotentWorkStealingDeque.java
}

The array \lstinline!workItems! is used in a cyclic way with head and
size encapsulated in an \lstinline!ArrayData! reference. The
\lstinline!ArrayData! reference is maintained by the atomic stamped
reference \lstinline!anchor! together with an integer stamp. Our
algorithm needs to guard against the ABA problem\footnote{If a thread
  reads a value $A$ from a shared variable, computes a new value, and
  then attempts a Compare-and-Swap operation, there is a chance that
  the Compare-and-Swap succeeds even if it should not, because for
  example between the read and the Compare-and-Swap some other thread
  changes the $A$ back to $B$ and then back to $A$ again.} in the
\lstinline!steal()! operation and uses the stamp as an ABA-prevention
tag.\footnote{The tag is a specific implementation choice. At the
  abstract level, the algorithms do not require the use of the tag
  mechanism but can use any ABA prevention mechanism, like bounded
  tags \cite{Moir1997} or hazard pointers \cite{Michael2004}}

Listing \ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put} shows the
\lstinline!put()! method. First the owner reads the anchor to get the
head and size of the queue as well as the ABA-prevention tag (Lines
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-read-1} --
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-read-2}). Then the owner
checks whether the array is full of not (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-full}). If it is full, the
owner expands the array by calling \lstinline!expand()! and loops
around (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-expand}). Otherwise, it
adds the work item at the tail of the queue (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-insert}). In Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-update-anchor} the owner
updates the anchor by incrementing the queues size and ABA-prevention
tag.

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Idempotent work-stealing deque: \lstinline!put()! method},
  label=lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/IdempotentWorkStealingDeque-put.java
}

The method \lstinline!expand()! is defined in Listing
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand}. For the owner to
expand a full queue, it allocates a new array with double the current
capacity (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand-new-array}) and copies
the work items from the current array to the newly allocated one
(Lines \ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand-copy-1} --
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand-copy-2}). After that,
it sets \lstinline!workItems! to the new array (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand-assign}).

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Idempotent work-stealing deque: \lstinline!expand()! method},
  label=lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-expand]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/IdempotentWorkStealingDeque-expand.java
}

Listing \ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take} defines the
method \lstinline!take()!. The owner reads the anchor variable to get
the head and size of the queue, and also the ABA-prevention tag (Lines
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take-read-anchor-1} --
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take-read-anchor-2}). Then it
checks if the queue is empty (Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take-check-size}). If it is
empty, \lstinline!take()! return \lstinline!null!. Otherwise, it reads
the work item at the tail of the queue (Lines
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take-get}). In Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-put-update-anchor} the method
updates the anchor by decrementing the queues size to indicate the
extraction of a work item.

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Idempotent work-stealing deque: \lstinline!take()! method},
  label=lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-take]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/IdempotentWorkStealingDeque-take.java
}


The \lstinline!steal()! method (Listing
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal}) starts by reading the
anchor variable to get the head and size of the queue as well as the
ABA-prevention tag (Lines
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read-anchor-1} --
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read-anchor-2}). In Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-check-size} the thread
checks if the queue is empty. If it is empty, \lstinline!steal()!
returns \lstinline!null!. Otherwise it gets a pointer to
\lstinline!workItems!. In Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read}, the thread reads
the work item at the head of the queue.

The \lstinline!compareAndSet()! in Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-steal-cas} checks that no work item
was lost: Checking of the ABA-prevention tag makes sure that since the
reads in Lines
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read-anchor-1} --
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read-anchor-2} the deque
owner has not overwritten the work item read in Line
\ref{lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal-read}. If the
\lstinline!compareAndSet()! is successful, it updates the anchor with
the incremented head and decremented size to indicate the stealing and
returns the stolen work item. Else, the thread tries to steal again.

\lstinputlisting[style=FloatNumbers,
  caption={Idempotent work-stealing deque: \lstinline!steal()! method},
  label=lst:idempotent-work-stealing-deque-steal]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/IdempotentWorkStealingDeque-steal.java
}


\section{Alternative Implementations}
\label{sec:queues-alternative-implementations}

\todo[inline]{Finish section \emph{Alternative Implementations}}

\subsection{Dynamic Work-Stealing Deque}

\begin{itemize}
\item A dynamic-sized nonblocking work stealing deque
  \cite{Hendler2006}
\item A dynamic-sized nonblocking work stealing deque
  \cite{Hendler2006a}
\item Dynamic circular work-stealing deque \cite{Chase2005}
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection{Dynamic circular work-stealing deque \cite{Chase2005}}

The list-based work-stealing deque algorithm presented by Hendler, Lev
and Shavit \cite{Hendler2006, Hendler2006a} uses a list of small
arrays to eliminate the overflow problem. However, it is relatively
complicated, does not use cyclic arrays (and therefore wastes some
memory), and introduces a trade-off between its time and space
complexity due to the extra work required for the list's maintenance.

\subsubsection{A dynamic-sized nonblocking work stealing deque
  \cite{Hendler2006, Hendler2006a}}

This paper presents the first dynamic memory work-stealing
algorithm. It is based on a novel way of building non-blocking
dynamic-sized work stealing deques by detecting synchronization
conflicts based on \emph{pointer-crossing} rather than \emph{gaps between
indices} as in the original ABP algorithm. As we show, the new
algorithm dramatically increases robustness and memory efficiency,
while causing applications no observable performance penalty. We
therefore believe it can replace array-based ABP work stealing deques,
eliminating the need for application-specific overflow mechanisms.

\subsubsection{Introduction}

Scheduling multithreaded computations on multiprocessor machines is a
well-studied problem. To execute multithreaded computations, the
operating system runs a collection of kernel-level processes, one per
processor, and each of these processes controls the execution of
multiple computational threads created dynamically by the executed
program. The scheduling problem is that of dynamically deciding which
thread is to be run by which process at a given time, so as to
maximize the utilization of the available computational resources
(processors).

Most of today's multiprocessor machines run programs in a
multiprogrammed mode, where the number of processors used by a
computation grows and shrinks over time. In such a mode, each program
has its own set of processes, and the operating system chooses in each
step which subset of these processes to run, according to the number
of processors available for that program at the time. Therefore the
scheduling algorithm must be dynamic (as opposed to static): at each
step it must schedule threads onto processes, without knowing which of
the processes are going to be run.

When a program is executed on a multiprocessor machine, the threads
of computation are dynamically generated by the different processes,
implying that the scheduling algorithm must have processes load
balance the computational work in a distributed fashion. The
challenge in designing such distributed work scheduling algorithms
is that performing a re-balancing, even between a pair of processes,
requires the use of costly synchronization operations. Rebalancing
operations must therefore be minimized.

Distributed work scheduling algorithms can be classified according to
one of two paradigms: work-sharing or work-stealing. In work-sharing
(also known as load-distribution), the processes continuously
re-distribute work so as to balance the amount of work assigned to
each [2]. In work-stealing, on the other hand, each process tries to
work on its newly created threads locally, and attempts to steal
threads from other processes only when it has no local threads to
execute. This way, the computational overhead of re-balancing is paid
by the processes that would otherwise be idle.

The ABP work-stealing algorithm of Arora, Blumofe, and Plaxton
\cite{Arora2001} has been gaining popularity as the multiprocessor
load-balancing technology of choice in both industry and academia
\cite{Arora2001, Acar2002, Blumofe1995, Frigo1998, Danaher2005}. The
scheme implements a provably efficient work-stealing paradigm due to
Blumofe and Leiserson \cite{Blumofe1999} that allows each process to
maintain a local work deque,\footnote{Actually, the work stealing
  algorithm uses a work stealing deque, which is like a deque
  \cite{Knuth1997} except that only one process can access one end of
  the queue (the \emph{bottom}), and only Pop operations can be invoked
  on the other end (the \emph{top}). For brevity, we refer to the data
  structure as a deque in the remainder of the paper.} and steal an
item from others if its deque becomes empty. It has been extended in
various ways such as stealing multiple items \cite{Hendler2002} and
stealing in a locality-guided way \cite{Acar2002}. At the core of the
ABP algorithm is an efficient scheme for stealing an item in a
non-blocking manner from an array-based deque, minimizing the need for
costly Compare-and-Swap (CAS)\footnote{The CAS (location, old-value,
  new-value) operation atomically reads a value from location, and
  writes new-value in location if and only if the value read is
  old-value. The operation returns a boolean indicating whether it
  succeeded in updating the location.} synchronization operations when
fetching items locally.

Unfortunately, the use of fixed size arrays\footnote{One may use
  cyclic array indexing but this does not help in preventing
  overflows.} introduces an inefficient memory-size/robustness
tradeoff: for n processes and total allocated memory size m, one can
tolerate at most m/n items in a deque. Moreover, if overflow does
occur, there is no simple way to malloc additional memory and
continue. This has, for example, forced parallel garbage collectors
using work-stealing to implement an application-specific blocking
overflow management mechanism [5, 10]. In multiprogrammed systems, the
main target of ABP work-stealing \cite{Arora2001}, even inefficient
over-allocation based on an application's maximal execution-DAG depth
\cite{Arora2001, Blumofe1999} may not always work. If a small subset
of non-preempted processes end up queuing most of the work items,
since the ABP algorithm sometimes starts pushing items from the middle
of the array even when the deque is empty, this can lead to
overflow.\footnote{The ABP algorithm's built-in \emph{reset on empty}
  mechanism helps in some, but not all, of these cases.}

This state of affairs leaves open the question of designing a
dynamic memory algorithm to overcome the above drawbacks, but to do so
while maintaining the low-cost synchronization overhead of the ABP
algorithm. This is not a straightforward task, since the the
array-based ABP algorithm is unique: it is possibly the only
real-world algorithm that allows one to transition in a lock-free
manner from the common case of using loads and stores to using a
costly CAS only when a potential conflict requires processes to
synchronize. This transition rests on the ability to detect these
boundary synchronization cases based on the relative gap among array
indices. There is no straightforward way of translating this
algorithmic trick to the pointer-based world of dynamic data
structures.

\minisec{The new algorithm}

This paper introduces the first lock-free\footnote{Our abstract deque
  definition is such that the original ABP algorithm is also
  lock-free.} dynamic-sized version of the ABP work-stealing
algorithm. It provides a near-optimal memory-size/robustness tradeoff:
for n processes and total pre-allocated memory size m, it can
potentially tolerate up to $O(m)$ items in a single deque. It also
allows one to malloc additional memory beyond m when needed, and as
our empirical data shows, it is far more robust than the array-based
ABP algorithm in multiprogrammed environments.

An ABP-style work stealing algorithm consists of a collection of deque
data structures with each process performing pushes and pops on the
\emph{bottom} end of its local deque and multiple thieves performing pops
on the \emph{top} end. The new algorithm implements each deque as a
doubly linked list of nodes, each of which is a short array that is
dynamically allocated from and freed to a shared pool; see Fig. 1. It
can also use malloc to add nodes to the shared pool in case its node
supply is exhausted.

The main technical difficulties in the design of the new algorithm
arise from the need to provide performance comparable to that of
ABP. This means the doubly linked list must be manipulated using only
loads and stores in the common case, resorting to using a costly CAS
only when a potential conflict requires it; it is challenging to make
this transition correctly while maintaining lock-freedom.

The potential conflict that requires CAS-based synchronization occurs
when a pop by a local process and a pop by a thief might both be
trying to remove the same item from the deque. The original ABP
algorithm detects this scenario by examining the gap between the
\lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom! array indices, and uses a CAS
operation only when they are \emph{too close}. Moreover, in the original
algorithm, the empty deque scenario is checked simply by checking
whether \lstinline!Bottom $\le$ Top!.

A key algorithmic feature of our new algorithm is the creation of an
equivalent mechanism to allow detection of these boundary situations
in our linked list structures using the relations between the
\lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom! pointers, even though these
point to entries that may reside in different nodes. On a high level,
our idea is to prove that one can restrict the number of possible ways
the pointers interact, and therefore, given one pointer, it is
possible to calculate the different possible positions for the other
pointer that imply such a boundary scenario.

The other key feature of our algorithm is that the dynamic insertion
and deletion operations of nodes into the doubly linked-list (when
needed in a push or pop) are performed in such a way that the local
thread uses only loads and stores. This contrasts with the more
general linked-list deque implementations [11, 12] which require a
double-compare-and-swap synchronization operation [13] to insert and
delete nodes.

\minisec{Performance analysis}

We compared our new dynamic-memory work-stealing algorithm to the
original ABP algorithm on a 16-node shared memory multiprocessor using
the benchmarks of the style used by Blumofe and Papadopoulos
\cite{Blumofe1998a}. We ran several standard Splash2 [15] applications
using the Hood scheduler \cite{Papadopoulos1998} with the ABP and new
work-stealing algorithms. Our results, presented in Sect. 3, show that
the new algorithm performs as well as ABP, that is, the added
dynamic-memory feature does not slow the applications down. Moreover,
the new algorithm provides a better memory/robustness ratio: the same
amount of memory provides far greater robustness in the new algorithm
than the original array-based ABP work-stealing. For example, running
Barnes-Hut using ABP work-stealing with an 8-fold level of
multiprogramming causes a failure in 40\% of the executions if one
uses the deque size that works for stand-alone (non-multiprogrammed)
runs. It causes no failures when using the new dynamic memory
work-stealing algorithm.

\subsubsection{The algorithm}

\minisec{Basic description}

Figure 1b presents our new deque data-structure. The doubly-linked
list's nodes are allocated from and freed to a shared pool, and the
only case in which one may need to malloc additional storage is if the
shared pool is exhausted. The deque supports the
\lstinline!PushBottom! and \lstinline!PopBottom! operations for the
local process, and the \lstinline!PopTop! operation for the thieves.

The first technical difficulty we encountered is in detecting the
conflict that may arise when the local \lstinline!PopBottom! and a
thief's \lstinline!PopTop! operations concurrently try to remove the
last item from the deque. Our solution is based on the observation
that when the deque is empty, one can restrict the number of possible
scenarios among the pointers. Given one pointer, we show that the
\emph{virtual} distance of the other, ignoring which array it resides in,
cannot be more than 1 if the deque is empty. We can thus easily test
for each of these scenarios. (Several such scenarios are depicted in
parts (a) and (b) of Fig. 2).

The next problem one faces is the maintenance of the deque's
doubly-linked list structure. We wish to avoid using CAS operations
when updating the next and previous pointers, since this would cause a
significant performance penalty. Our solution is to allow only the
local process to update these fields, thus preventing
\lstinline!PopTop! operations from doing so when moving from one node
to another. We would like to keep the deque dynamic, which means
freeing old nodes when they're not needed anymore. This restriction
immediately implies that an active list node may point to an already
freed node, or even to a node which was freed and reallocated again,
essentially ruining the list structure. As we prove, the algorithm can
overcome this problem by having a \lstinline!PopTop! operation that
moves to a new node free only the node preceding the old node and not
the old node itself. This allows us to maintain the invariant that the
doubly-linked list structure between the \lstinline!Top! and
\lstinline!Bottom! pointers is preserved. This is true even in
scenarios such as that depicted in parts b and c of Fig. 2 where the
pointers cross over.

\minisec{The implementation}

C++-like pseudocode for our deque algorithm is given in Figs. 3 --
5. As depicted in Fig. 3, the deque object stores the
\lstinline!Bottom! and \lstinline!Top! pointers information in the
\lstinline!Bottom! and \lstinline!Top! data members. This information
includes the pointer to a list's node and an offset into that node's
array. For the \lstinline!Top! variable, it also includes a tag value
to prevent the ABA problem \cite{Dechev2006}. The deque methods uses
the \lstinline!EncodeBottom!, \lstinline!DecodeBottom!,
\lstinline!EncodeTop! and \lstinline!DecodeTop! macros to
encode/decode this information to/from a value that fits in a CAS-able
size word.\footnote{If the architecture does not support a 64-bit CAS
  operation, we may not have the space to save the whole node
  pointer. In this case, we might use the offset of the node from some
  base address given by the shared memory pool. For example, if the
  nodes are allocated continuously, the address of the first node can
  be such a base address.} Underlined procedures in the pseudocode
represent code blocks which are presented in the detailed algorithm
presentation used for the correctness proof in Sect. 4. We now
describe each of the methods.

\textbf{\lstinline!PushBottom!}

The \lstinline!PushBottom! method begins by reading \lstinline!Bottom!
and storing the pushed value in the cell it's pointing to (Lines
1 -- 2). Then it calculates the next value of \lstinline!Bottom! linking
a new node to the list if necessary (Lines 3 -- 14). Finally the method
updates \lstinline!Bottom! to its new value (Line 15). As in the
original ABP algorithm, this method is executed only by the owner
process, and therefore regular writes suffice (both for the value and
\lstinline!Bottom! updates). Note that the new node is linked to the
list before \lstinline!Bottom! is updated, so the list structure is
preserved for the nodes between \lstinline!Bottom! and
\lstinline!Top!.

\textbf{\lstinline!PopTop!}

The \lstinline!PopTop! method begins by reading the \lstinline!Top!
and \lstinline!Bottom! values, in that order (Lines 16 -- 18). Then it
tests whether these values indicate an empty deque, and returns
\lstinline!EMPTY! if they do\footnote{This test may also return
  \lstinline!ABORT! if \lstinline!Top! was modified, since then it is
  not guaranteed that the tested values represent a consistent view of
  the memory.} (Line 19). Otherwise, it calculates the next position
for \lstinline!Top! (Lines 20 -- 31). Before updating \lstinline!Top! to
its new value, the method must read the value which should be returned
if the steal succeeds (Line 32) (this read cannot be done after the
update of \lstinline!Top! because by then the node may already be
freed by some other concurrent \lstinline!PopTop! execution). Finally
the method tries to update \lstinline!Top! to its new value using a
CAS operation (Line 34), returning the popped value if it succeeds, or
\lstinline!ABORT! if it fails. (In the work stealing algorithm, if a
thief process encounters contention with another, it may be preferable
to try stealing from a different deque; returning \lstinline!ABORT! in
this case provides the opportunity for the system to decide between
retrying on the same deque or doing something different.) If the CAS
succeeds, the method also checks whether there is an old node that
needs to be freed (Line 36). As explained earlier, a node is released
only if \lstinline!Top! moved to a new node, and the node released is
not the old top node, but the preceding one.

\textbf{\lstinline!PopBottom!}

The \lstinline!PopBottom! method begins by reading \lstinline!Bottom!
and updating it to its new value (Lines 43 -- 55) after reading the value
to be popped (Line 54). Then it reads the value of \lstinline!Top!
(Line 56), to check for the special cases of popping the last entry of
the deque, and popping from an empty deque. If the \lstinline!Top!
value read points to the old \lstinline!Bottom! position (Lines 58 -- 
63), then the method rewrites \lstinline!Bottom! to its old position,
and returns \lstinline!EMPTY! (since the deque was empty even without
this \lstinline!PopBottom! operation). Otherwise, if \lstinline!Top!
is pointing to the new \lstinline!Bottom! position (Lines 64 -- 78), then
the popped entry was the last in the deque, and as in the original ABP
algorithm, the method updates the \lstinline!Top! tag value using a
CAS, to prevent a concurrent \lstinline!PopTop! operation from
popping out the same entry. Otherwise there was at least one entry in
the deque after the \lstinline!Bottom! update (lines 79 -- 83), in which
case the popped entry is returned. Note that, as in the original ABP
algorithm, most executions of the method will be short, and will not
involve any CAS-based synchronization operations.

\textbf{Memory management}

We implement the shared node pool using a variation of Scott's shared
pool [18]. It maintains a local group of g nodes per process, from
which the process may allocate nodes without the need to
synchronize. When the nodes in this local group are exhausted, it
allocates a new group of $g$ nodes from a shared LIFO pool using a CAS
operation. When a process frees a node, it returns it to its local
group, and if the size of the local group exceeds $2g$, it returns $g$
nodes to the shared LIFO pool. In our benchmarks we used a group size
of 1, which means that in case of a fluctuation between pushing and
popping, the first node is always local and CAS is not necessary.

\minisec{Enhancements}

We briefly describe two enhancements to the above dynamic-memory deque
algorithm.

\textbf{Reset-on-Empty}

In the original ABP algorithm, the \lstinline!PopBottom! operation
uses a mechanism that resets \lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom! to
point back to the beginning of the array every time it detects an
empty deque (including the case of popping the last entry by
\lstinline!PopBottom!). This reset operation is necessary in ABP since
it is the only \emph{anti-overflow} mechanism at its disposal.

Our algorithm does not need this method to prevent overflows, since it
works with the dynamic nodes. However, adding a version of this
resetting feature gives the potential of improving our space
complexity, especially when working with large nodes.

There are two issues to be noted when implementing the reset-on-empty
mechanism in our dynamic deque. The first issue is that while
performing the reset operation, we create another type of empty deque
scenario, in which \lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom! do not point
to the same cells nor to neighboring ones (see part c of Fig. 2). This
scenario requires a more complicated check for the empty deque
scenario by the \lstinline!PopTop! method (Line 19). The second issue
is that we must be careful when choosing the array node to which
\lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom! point after the reset. In case
the pointers point to the same node before the reset, we simply reset
to the beginning of that node. Otherwise, we reset to the beginning of
the node pointed to by \lstinline!Top!. Note, however, that
\lstinline!Top! may point to the same node as \lstinline!Bottom! and
then be updated by a concurrent \lstinline!PopTop! operation, which
may result in changing on-the-fly the node to which we direct
\lstinline!Top! and \lstinline!Bottom!.

\textbf{Using a base array}

In the implementation described, all the deque nodes are identical and
allocated from the shared pool. This introduces a trade-off between
the performance of the algorithm and its space complexity: small
arrays save space but cost in allocation overhead, while large arrays
cost space but reduce the allocation overhead.

One possible improvement is to use a large array for the initial base
node, allocated for each of the deques, and to use the pool only when
overflow space is needed. This base node is used only by the
process/deque it was originally allocated to, and is never freed to
the shared pool. Whenever a Pop operation frees this node, it raises a
boolean flag, indicating that the base node is now free. When a
\lstinline!PushBottom! operation needs to allocate and link a new
node, it first checks this flag, and if true, links the base node to
the deque (instead of a regular node allocated from the shared pool).

\subsubsection{Conclusions}

We have shown how to create a dynamic memory version of the ABP work
stealing algorithm. It may be interesting to see how our
dynamic-memory technique is applied to other schemes that improve on
ABP-work stealing such as the locality-guided work-stealing of
Blelloch et. al. \cite{Acar2002} or the steal-half algorithm of
Hendler and Shavit \cite{Hendler2002}.

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Dynamic work-stealing deque}, 
  label=lst:dynamic-work-stealing-deque]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DynamicWorkStealingDeque.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Dynamic work-stealing deque: \lstinline!put()! method},
  label=lst:dynamic-work-stealing-deque-put]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DynamicWorkStealingDeque-put.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Dynamic work-stealing deque: \lstinline!take()! method},
  label=lst:dynamic-work-stealing-deque-take]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DynamicWorkStealingDeque-take.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Dynamic work-stealing deque: \lstinline!steal()! method},
  label=lst:dynamic-work-stealing-deque-steal]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DynamicWorkStealingDeque-steal.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Dynamic work-stealing deque: \lstinline!isEmpty()! method},
  label=lst:dynamic-work-stealing-deque-isempty]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DynamicWorkStealingDeque-isempty.java
}

\subsection{Duplicating Work-Stealing Queue}

Duplicating queues as an alternative to idempotent queues.

\begin{itemize}
\item The design of a task parallel library \cite{Leijen2009}
\item Checkfence: checking consistency of concurrent data types on
  relaxed memory models \cite{Burckhardt2007}
\item Checkfence: checking consistency of concurrent data types on
  relaxed memory models \cite{Burckhardt2007a}
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection{The design of a task parallel library \cite{Leijen2009} (Summarized version)}

We provide a novel implementation of these task queues, called
duplicating queues. A surprising feature of the duplicating queue is
that it behaves in a sequentially inconsistent way on weak memory
models. However, the nondeterminism of the queue is carefully captured
in a benign way by sometimes duplicating elements in the queue (but
never losing or inventing elements, and still ensuring that tasks are
only executed once). Of course, exploiting weak memory models is
playing with fire. That's why we verified the correctness of the
duplicating queue formally using the Checkfence tool
\cite{Burckhardt2007, Burckhardt2007a}.

A duplicating queue is a novel data structure for implementing
non-blocking task queues that can work efficiently on architectures
with weak memory models. These queues are sequentially inconsistent
but capture the resulting non-determinism in a benign way by sometimes
duplicating elements.

\subsubsection{Work Distribution}

Each worker keeps tasks in its own doubled-ended queue. The task queue
provides the operations \lstinline!put()!, \lstinline!take()! and
\lstinline!steal()!. When a task is created, the running worker thread
pushes the task onto the local queue of its group. If it finishes its
current task, it will try to pop a task from the group queue and
continue with that. This way, a task is always pushed and popped
locally, which benefits both the data locality of the task and reduces
the amount of synchronization needed. If a worker thread finds there
are no more tasks in its queue (and none of the other workers in its
group can be unblocked), it becomes a thief : it chooses another task
queue of another worker group at random and tries to steal a task or
replicable task from the (non-local) end of the task queue using
\lstinline!steal()!. For many parallel conquer-and-divide algorithms,
this ensures that the largest tasks are stolen first. For loops, which
are typically implemented via replicable tasks, it means that tasks
are only replicated on demand, i.e. when another thread starts
idling. Unfortunately, at this point we have to do more
synchronization for our queues, since we have multiple parties that
can try to steal at the same time from the same queue, and we can have
interaction between the worker thread associated with that queue and
the stealing thread.

The performance of work stealing is largely dependent on the
performance of its task queue implementation. In particular, we need
to ensure that each pushed task is only popped or taken once such that
each task is only executed once. To achieve atomic take and pop
operations, most implementations, like \cite{Arora2001}, rely on the
THE protocol \cite{Dijkstra1965}, which allow the common
\lstinline!put()! and \lstinline!take()! operations to be implemented
without using expensive atomic compare-and-swap
operations. Unfortunately, this only works on machines with a
sequentially consistent memory model, and in practice there are just
few architectures that support this. On the x86 for example, one needs
to insert a memory barrier in \lstinline!take()! operation which is
almost as expensive as taking a lock in the first place.

Moreover, there is an even bigger disadvantage to queues based on the
THE protocol which is more subtle. As shown in Section 4.1, whenever
f2.Value is called where the future f2 has not yet started, we should
execute it directly on the calling thread. But if we use the THE
protocol, there is no mechanism to get f2 exclusively: we can only
\lstinline!take()! it from our queue if it happens to be the last task
that was pushed, otherwise one cannot determine whether f2 is on the
local queue, or resides in a queue of another worker group. Without
gaining exclusive access in some other way, we cannot execute the task
directly or otherwise we may execute a task more than once since it
can concurrently be taken by another worker, or popped if it resided
on a non-local task queue.

Since this is exactly the common case that we need to optimize, we
opted for another approach where each task uses internally an atomic
compare-and-swap operation to ensure that it only executes once. We
assign to each task an associated state, Init, Running, and Done. The
internal Run method on a task performs an atomic compare-and-swap
operation to try to switch from Init to Running. If the atomic
operation succeeds, the associated action is executed and the state is
set to Done afterwards:

\begin{lstlisting}[style=Listing]
  void Task.Run(){
    if(CompareAndSwap(ref state, Init, Running)){
      Execute(); // execute the associated action
      state = Done;
    }
  }
\end{lstlisting}

Effectively, this ensures that each task is only executed once, or
stated differently: running a task is an idempotent
operation. Unfortunately, if we would use task queues based on the THE
protocol we now use two mechanisms for mutual exclusion, and execute
both a memory barrier instruction on a \lstinline!take()! operation,
and an interlocked instruction when calling Run. Since these are
expensive instructions that require synchronization among the
processors, we would like to avoid these. As shown in the previous
paragraphs, the interlocked instruction in the Run method is essential
and since we now ensure exclusivity on the task level, it is possible
to use a weaker data structure for the task queues. In particular,
this leads to the development of the duplicating queue.

\subsubsection{Duplicating Queues}

A duplicating queue is a double-ended queue that potentially returns a
pushed element more than once. In particular, the \lstinline!put()!
and \lstinline!take()! operations behave like normal, but the
\lstinline!steal()! operation is allowed to either take an element
(and remove it from the queue), or to just duplicate an element in the
queue. While this nondeterminism might be dangerous for many clients,
it is fine for our usage of the duplicating queue: the Task's Run
method is idempotent and ReplicableTask's expect to be executed in
parallel. Other properties of a duplicating queues are as usual: a
duplicating queue never loses an element, and returns all pushed
elements after a finite number of \lstinline!take()! (and
\lstinline!steal()!) operations.

By allowing duplication we can avoid an expensive memory barrier
instruction in the \lstinline!take()! operation on the x86
architecture. More generally, our duplicating queue is designed
specifically to be correct on architectures satisfying the Total Store
Order (TSO) memory model (Sindhu et al. 1991) or stronger model. To
our knowledge, this is one of the first data structures that takes
specific advantage of weaker memory models to avoid memory
barriers. An interesting aspect is that the non-determinism that is
introduced by the weaker memory model is captured in a benign way
where the number of duplicated elements is non-deterministically
determined.

\subsubsection{Related Work}

There is a wealth of research into parallel scheduling algorithms,
data structures, and language designs, and we necessarily restrict
this section to work that is directly relevant to work stealing and
embedded library designs.

The idea of duplicating queues has recently been described as
\emph{idempotent} queues \cite{Michael2009}. We were not aware of this
work at the time of writing this paper and arrived at our results
independently (doing our first implementation in January 2008). Their
general motivation and the semantics of the idempotent queue seem
largely identical, but the implementation is quite different. Their
elegant implementation packs fields together in a memory word and
relies strictly on atomic compare-and-swap and memory ordering
instructions. In contrast, our implementation uses a simple lock on
all but the critical paths which can simplify many implementation
aspects and also removes a level of indirection on the critical path.

\subsubsection{The design of a task parallel library \cite{Leijen2009} (Full version)}

Under the hood, tasks and replicable tasks are assigned by the runtime
to special worker threads. TPL uses standard work-stealing for this
work distribution \cite{Frigo1998} where tasks are held in a thread
local task queue. When the task queue of a thread becomes empty, the
thread will try to steal tasks from the task queue of another
thread. The performance of work stealing algorithms is in a large part
determined by the efficiency of their task queue implementations.

We provide a novel implementation of these task queues, called
duplicating queues. A surprising feature of the duplicating queue is
that it behaves in a sequentially inconsistent way on weak memory
models. However, the nondeterminism of the queue is carefully captured
in a benign way by sometimes duplicating elements in the queue (but
never losing or inventing elements, and still ensuring that tasks are
only executed once). Of course, exploiting weak memory models is
playing with fire. That's why we verified the correctness of the
duplicating queue formally using the Checkfence tool
\cite{Burckhardt2007, Burckhardt2007a}.

A duplicating queue is a novel data structure for implementing
non-blocking task queues that can work efficiently on architectures
with weak memory models. These queues are sequentially inconsistent
but capture the resulting non-determinism in a benign way by sometimes
duplicating elements.

\subsubsection{Work Distribution}

As we have seen TPL is convenient to use, but it can only be
successful if besides elegance, it is also performant. In this section
we focus on important high-level design decisions and focus later on
how these decisions inform the design of the work stealing
implementation.

\minisec{Design for efficiency}

The most important contributor for efficiency is the decision to give
no concurrency guarantees. Parallel tasks are only potentially run in
parallel. The library specifies that a task is executed between its
creation and the first call to Wait. This means that we can give a
valid implementation that is fully sequential. Indeed, there is a
special debug mode where all tasks are executed sequentially when Wait
is called (and will therefore never have race
conditions). Effectively, there are no fairness guarantees for
parallel tasks. In contrast with OS threads, parallel tasks are only
good for finite CPU-bound tasks, but not for asynchronous programming.

\minisec{Work stealing}

The TPL runtime reuses the ideas of the well known work stealing
techniques as implemented for example in CILK \cite{Frigo1998,
  Danaher2005} and the Java fork-join framework \cite{Lea2000,
  Lea2000a, Lea2004, Lea2006}. We shortly discuss its principles and
focus on why our implementation differs.

The runtime system uses one worker group per processor. Each group
contains one or more worker threads where only one of them is running
and where all others are blocked. Whenever this running worker thread
becomes blocked too (due to the previous case 2 for example) an extra
running worker thread is added to that group such that the processor
is always busy. A worker thread can also be retired and give control
to another worker in its group when that worker can be unblocked
(because the task on which it was waiting has completed for example).

Each worker group keeps tasks in its own doubled-ended queue. The task
queue provides the operations \lstinline!put()!, \lstinline!take()!
and \lstinline!steal()!. When a task is created, the running worker
thread pushes the task onto the local queue of its group. If it
finishes its current task, it will try to pop a task from the group
queue and continue with that. This way, a task is always pushed and
popped locally, which benefits both the data locality of the task and
reduces the amount of synchronization needed. If a worker thread finds
there are no more tasks in its queue (and none of the other workers in
its group can be unblocked), it becomes a thief : it chooses another
task queue of another worker group at random and tries to steal a task
or replicable task from the (non-local) end of the task queue using
\lstinline!steal()!. For many parallel conquer-and-divide algorithms,
this ensures that the largest tasks are stolen first. For loops, which
are typically implemented via replicable tasks, it means that tasks
are only replicated on demand, i.e. when another thread starts
idling. Unfortunately, at this point we have to do more
synchronization for our queues, since we have multiple parties that
can try to steal at the same time from the same queue, and we can have
interaction between the worker thread associated with that queue and
the stealing thread.

The performance of work stealing is largely dependent on the
performance of its task queue implementation. In particular, we need
to ensure that each pushed task is only popped or taken once such that
each task is only executed once. To achieve atomic take and pop
operations, most implementations, like \cite{Arora2001}, rely on the
THE protocol \cite{Dijkstra1965}, which allow the common
\lstinline!put()! and \lstinline!take()! operations to be implemented
without using expensive atomic compare-and-swap
operations. Unfortunately, this only works on machines with a
sequentially consistent memory model, and in practice there are just
few architectures that support this. On the x86 for example, one needs
to insert a memory barrier in \lstinline!take()! operation which is
almost as expensive as taking a lock in the first place.

Moreover, there is an even bigger disadvantage to queues based on the
THE protocol which is more subtle. As shown in Section 4.1, whenever
f2.Value is called where the future f2 has not yet started, we should
execute it directly on the calling thread. But if we use the THE
protocol, there is no mechanism to get f2 exclusively: we can only
\lstinline!take()! it from our queue if it happens to be the last task
that was pushed, otherwise one cannot determine whether f2 is on the
local queue, or resides in a queue of another worker group. Without
gaining exclusive access in some other way, we cannot execute the task
directly or otherwise we may execute a task more than once since it
can concurrently be taken by another worker, or popped if it resided
on a non-local task queue.

Since this is exactly the common case that we need to optimize, we
opted for another approach where each task uses internally an atomic
compare-and-swap operation to ensure that it only executes once. We
assign to each task an associated state, Init, Running, and Done. The
internal Run method on a task performs an atomic compare-and-swap
operation to try to switch from Init to Running. If the atomic
operation succeeds, the associated action is executed and the state is
set to Done afterwards:

\begin{lstlisting}[style=Listing]
  void Task.Run(){
    if(CompareAndSwap(ref state, Init, Running)){
      Execute(); // execute the associated action
      state = Done;
    }
  }
\end{lstlisting}

Effectively, this ensures that each task is only executed once, or
stated differently: running a task is an idempotent
operation. Unfortunately, if we would use task queues based on the THE
protocol we now use two mechanisms for mutual exclusion, and execute
both a memory barrier instruction on a \lstinline!take()! operation,
and an interlocked instruction when calling Run. Since these are
expensive instructions that require synchronization among the
processors, we would like to avoid these. As shown in the previous
paragraphs, the interlocked instruction in the Run method is essential
and since we now ensure exclusivity on the task level, it is possible
to use a weaker data structure for the task queues. In particular,
this leads to the development of the duplicating queue.

Note that only tasks need this additional check; for replicating tasks
there is no need to do the atomic compare-and-swap operation since
they already implement their own mutual exclusion.

\subsubsection{Duplicating Queues}

A duplicating queue is a double-ended queue that potentially returns a
pushed element more than once. In particular, the \lstinline!put()!
and \lstinline!take()! operations behave like normal, but the
\lstinline!steal()! operation is allowed to either take an element
(and remove it from the queue), or to just duplicate an element in the
queue. While this nondeterminism might be dangerous for many clients,
it is fine for our usage of the duplicating queue: the Task's Run
method is idempotent and ReplicableTask's expect to be executed in
parallel. Other properties of a duplicating queues are as usual: a
duplicating queue never loses an element, and returns all pushed
elements after a finite number of \lstinline!take()! (and
\lstinline!steal()!) operations.

By allowing duplication we can avoid an expensive memory barrier
instruction in the \lstinline!take()! operation on the x86
architecture. More generally, our duplicating queue is designed
specifically to be correct on architectures satisfying the Total Store
Order (TSO) memory model (Sindhu et al. 1991) or stronger model. To
our knowledge, this is one of the first data structures that takes
specific advantage of weaker memory models to avoid memory
barriers. An interesting aspect is that the non-determinism that is
introduced by the weaker memory model is captured in a benign way
where the number of duplicated elements is non-deterministically
determined.

\subsubsection{Performance}

Measuring the performance of the duplicating queue in isolation is not
very useful. The reason is that the main performance benefit does not
come from the duplicating queue, but from being able to guarantee
mutual exclusivity in the tasks themselves, such that a task can be
executed directly when Wait is called and the task has not started
yet. Since the task queues no longer need to guarantee mutual
exclusivity, the duplicating queue is mostly an optimization to avoid
using too many expensive interlocked instructions.

Therefore, it is better to measure the benefit of being able to
directly execute a task for which Wait is called (and which has not
started yet). We created two versions of the library: one based on a
duplicating queue with direct execution of tasks, and a traditional
implementation based on the standard THE protocol. The standard
fibonacci benchmark represents one of the worst-case examples since
most waits are for tasks that were just pushed on the stack (and
reside on the top of the stack). We ran this benchmark on a 4
processor machine which used 196418 tasks ($\approx$ 500.000 tasks per
second). The implementation based on the duplicating queue was 1.4
times faster when using all processors. Here are some statistics,
where DUP refers to the duplicating queue implementation, and THE to
the implementation based on the THE protocol.

As we can see, the performance of THE mostly suffered because there
were many more switches between threads, and many more thread
migrations. This happened precisely when Wait was called for a task
that had not yet started. Since one cannot reliably determine whether
this task was on the local queue, a fresh worker thread was needed to
execute the task resulting in a thread switch. Of course, this
automatically also lead to more migration of threads where ready
worker threads were stolen by another worker group. Interestingly,
the number of task steals are about the same as this is mostly
determined by the particular algorithm and sizes of the tasks.

Of course, for most fork-join parallelism (including the fibonacci
benchmark), the task to be waited upon is often right on the top of
the local task queue. When Wait is called on a task that has not
started yet, we can optimize for this case in the THE implementation
by simply popping the top of the stack if that happens to be our task
and execute it directly. When applying this simple optimization, both
implementations perform very similar for this benchmark. Of course,
the DUP implementation outperforms again when the parallelism is less
structured using futures for example, and in general at any time when
Wait is called on a task that is not on the top of the stack.

\subsubsection{Related Work}

There is a wealth of research into parallel scheduling algorithms,
data structures, and language designs, and we necessarily restrict
this section to work that is directly relevant to work stealing and
embedded library designs.

The idea of duplicating queues has recently been described as
\emph{idempotent} queues \cite{Michael2009}. We were not aware of this
work at the time of writing this paper and arrived at our results
independently (doing our first implementation in January 2008). Their
general motivation and the semantics of the idempotent queue seem
largely identical, but the implementation is quite different. Their
elegant implementation packs fields together in a memory word and
relies strictly on atomic compare-and-swap and memory ordering
instructions. In contrast, our implementation uses a simple lock on
all but the critical paths which can simplify many implementation
aspects and also removes a level of indirection on the critical path.

\subsubsection{Conclusions}

We described the lessons learned in the design of a library for
parallel programming. TPL is an example of the possibilities of an
embedded domain specific language that relies heavily on parametric
polymorphism and first-class anonymous functions, and we hope to apply
this to other domains as well.

To the best of our knowledge, the duplicating queue is one of the
first data structures that explicitly takes the properties of weak
memory models into account, and it is surprising we can capture the
resulting non-determinism in a benign way without for example losing
or inventing elements. It would be interesting to see if we can adapt
the structure such that it can be applied for other parallel
algorithms too.

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Duplicating work-stealing deque}, 
  label=lst:duplicating-work-stealing-deque]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DuplicatingWorkStealingDeque.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Duplicating work-stealing deque: \lstinline!put()! method}, 
  label=lst:duplicating-work-stealing-deque-put]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DuplicatingWorkStealingDeque-put.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Duplicating work-stealing deque: \lstinline!take()! method},
  label=lst:duplicating-work-stealing-deque-take]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DuplicatingWorkStealingDeque-take.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Duplicating work-stealing deque: \lstinline!steal()! method},
  label=lst:duplicating-work-stealing-deque-steal]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DuplicatingWorkStealingDeque-steal.java
}

\lstinputlisting[style=Numbers,
  caption={Duplicating work-stealing deque: \lstinline!expand()! method}, 
  label=lst:duplicating-work-stealing-deque-expand]{
    ../listings/queues-implementation/DuplicatingWorkStealingDeque-expand.java
}


%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "thesis"
%%% End: 
